Filetypes and metadata episode (#33)
HealthBioscienceIDEAS/microscopy-novice: episodes/filetypes-and-metadata.md

---
title: 'Filetypes and metadata'
teaching: 30
exercises: 10
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions 

- Which file formats should be used for microscopy images?

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Explain the pros and cons of some popular image file formats
- Explain the difference between lossless and lossy compression
- Inspect image metadata with the napari-aicsimageio plugin
- Inspect and set an image's scale in Napari

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Image file formats

Images can be saved in a wide variety of file formats - e.g. you may be familiar 
with some like .jpg, .png or .tiff. Microscopy images have an especially wide 
range of options, with hundreds of different formats in use, often specific to 
particular microscope manufacturers. With this being said, how do we choose 
which format to use?

## Metadata

First, let's look closer at what gets stored inside an image file.

There are two main things that get stored inside image files: _pixel values_ and 

> _metadata_. We've looked at pixel values in previous episodes -  this is the raw 

Reviewer: Could add specific link here, i.e.
"We looked at pixel values in our episode on [multi-dimensional images](multi-dimensional-images.html)"

image data as an array of numbers with specific dimensions and data type. The 
metadata, on the other hand, is a wide variety of additional information about 
the image and how it was acquired.

For example, let's take a look at the metadata in the 
'Plate1-Blue-A-12-Scene-3-P3-F2-03.czi' file we downloaded as part of the 
[setup instructions](../learners/setup.md). To browse the metadata we will use 
a Napari plugin called [napari-aicsimageio
](https://www.napari-hub.org/plugins/napari-aicsimageio). This plugin allows a 
wide variety of file formats to be opened in Napari that aren't supported by 
default. This plugin was already installed in the [setup instructions
](../learners/setup.md), so you should be able to start using it straight away.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

> ### Napari-aicsimagio installation

Reviewer: I'm not sure that this is the right place for this callout. Would it be better to have it in the setup instructions? Here it I think it distracts from the episodes learning objectives.

Author: Sounds good - let's move this to the setup instructions then. @thompson318 - could you add this to your setup instructions PR?

Reviewer: Just checked, this is done in setup.

[Image Display episode](./FIXME.md). To support the widest range of file 
formats, napari-aicsimagio needs integration with Bio-Formats (we'll discuss 
Bio-Formats later in the episode). Unfortunately, this isn't currently possible 
via `Plugins > Install / Uninstall Plugins...`, hence why we used 
[conda to install it
](https://github.com/AllenCellModeling/napari-aicsimageio#installation).

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Let's open the 'Plate1-Blue-A-12-Scene-3-P3-F2-03.czi' file by removing any 
existing image layers, then dragging and dropping it onto the canvas. In the 
pop-up menu that appears, select 'napari-aicsimageio'. Note this can take a 
while to open, so give it some time! Alternatively, you can select in Napari's 
top menu-bar:  
`File > Open File(s)...`

![](fig/plate1-czi-napari.png){alt="A screenshot of yeast sample data shown in 
Napari"}

This image is part of a [published dataset on Image Data Resource
](https://idr.openmicroscopy.org/search/?query=Name:idr0011-ledesmafernandez-dad4/screenD) 
(accession number idr0011), and comes from the [OME sample data
](https://downloads.openmicroscopy.org/images/Zeiss-CZI/idr0011/). It is a 3D 

> fluorescence microscopy image of yeast with three channels.

Reviewer: See my comments on the mutli-dimensional image PR. I think technically this image has 3 layers, each layer being a single channel image. Annoyingly each layer is named as a channel (presumably in the metadata). Once we've decided how we're going to handle naming consistency in the multi-dimension-image episode we need to check here and make sure we are consistent.

```
```output
[0.35 0.2047619 0.2047619]
[0.35 0.2047619 0.2047619]
[0.35 0.2047619 0.2047619]
```

### 2
```python
image_layer_3.scale = (0.35, 0.4, 0.4)
```
You should see that layer 3 becomes about twice as wide and twice as tall as the 
other layers. This is because we set the pixel size in y and x (which used to 
be 0.2047619&mu;m) to about twice its original value (now 0.4&mu;m).

### 3
```python
image_layer_3.scale = (0.35, 0.4, 0.2047619)
```
You should see that layer 3 appears squashed - with the same width as other 
layers, but about twice the height. This is because we set the pixel size in y 
(which used to be 0.2047619&mu;m) to about twice its original value (now 
0.4&mu;m). Bear in mind that setting the pixel sizes inappropriately can lead 
to stretched or squashed images like this!

### 4

We set the pixel size in y/x to half its original value of 0.2047619&mu;m:
```python
image_layer_1.scale = (0.35, 0.10238095, 0.10238095)
image_layer_2.scale = (0.35, 0.10238095, 0.10238095)
image_layer_3.scale = (0.35, 0.10238095, 0.10238095)
```
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Choosing a file format

> Now that we've seen an example of browsing metadata in Napari, let's look more 

Reviewer: Did we also edit the metadata when we changed pixel size? Should it be:
"Now that we've seen an example of browsing and editing metadata" ?

Author: The pixel size is only changed within Napari (for display) - all the metadata remains unchanged.

Reviewer: Thanks, let's leave as is then.

closely into how we can decide on a file format. There are many factors to 
consider, including:

### Dimension support

> Some file formats will only support a certain number of dimensions. For example, 

Author: I think JPEG and PNG support 2D images (grayscale or RGB), with png also supporting an alpha channel (RGBA). I don't think they can support arbitrary numbers of channels (at least not with the standard specification). I'll clarify this a bit more in the text

specification is freely available, and can be opened in many different pieces of 
software e.g. OME-TIFF. 

### Compression

Different file formats use different types of 'compression'. Compression is a 
way to reduce image file sizes, by changing the way that the image pixel values 
are stored. There are two main types:

- **Lossless compression** - when the image file is written, an algorithm is 
applied to reduce its file size. This process is 'lossless' i.e. when the file 
is opened again the compression process can be reversed perfectly to give 
exactly the same pixel values.

- **Lossy compression** - when the image is written, an algorithm is applied to 
reduce its file size. This process is 'lossy' i.e. when the file is opened again 
the pixel values will be _different_. Some image quality is lost via this 
process, but it can achieve much smaller file sizes.

For microscopy data, you should therefore use a file format with no compression, 
or lossless compression. Lossy compression should be avoided as it degrades the 
pixel values!

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge 

## Compression

Let's remove all layers from the Napari viewer, and open the 

> 'mitocheck.ome.tiff' dataset. You should have already downloaded this as part of 

Reviewer: should be 00001_01.ome.tiff

the [setup instructions](../learners/setup.md).

Run the code below in Napari's console. This will save a specific timepoint of 
this image (time = 30) as four different file formats (.tiff, .png + low and 
high quality .jpg). Note: these files will be written to the same folder as the 
'mitocheck.ome.tiff' image!

```python
from skimage.io import imsave
from pathlib import Path

# Get the mitocheck.ome layer, and get timepoint = 30
layer = viewer.layers["mitocheck.ome"]
image = layer.data[30, :, :]

# Save as different file formats in same folder as mitocheck.ome
folder_path = Path(layer.source.path).parent
imsave( folder_path / "test-tiff.tiff", image)
imsave( folder_path / "test-png.png", image)
imsave( folder_path / "test-jpg-high-quality.jpg", image, quality=75)
imsave( folder_path / "test-jpg-low-quality.jpg", image, quality=30)

```

- Go to the folder where 'mitocheck.ome.tiff' was saved and look at the file 
sizes of the newly written images (`test-tiff`, `test-png`, 
`test-jpg-high-quality` and `test-jpg-low-quality`). Which is biggest? 
Which is smallest?

> - Open all four images in Napari. Zoom in very close to a bright nucleus, and 

Reviewer: I had a quick go at creating a difference image of 2 layers in napari but failed. That might be too advanced for this lesson but would be a good way of highlighting what's lost in compression.

Reviewer 2: This worked for me, but the intensity values are quite low (most less than 50) in that slice, so I don't think it's really that helpful, since the differences are only +/- 1 or 2 in each voxel:

```python
img_tiff=viewer.layers['test-tiff']
img_jpg_lo=viewer.layers['test-jpg-low-quality']
#Since both unsigned ints, need to do a cast to avoid clipping/wrapping
diff_jpg_lo=img_tiff.data.astype(int) - img_jpg_lo.data.astype(int)
viewer.add_image(diff_jpg_lo)
```

### File sizes

'test_tiff' is largest, followed by 'test-png', then 'test-jpg-high-quality', 
then 'test-jpg-low-quality'.

### Differences to original

By showing/hiding different layers, you should see that 'test-tiff' and 
'test-png' look identical to the original image (when its slider is set to 
timepoint 30). In contrast, both jpg files show blocky artefacts around the 
nuclei - the pixel values have clearly been altered. This effect is worse in the 
low quality jpeg than the high quality one.

### Lossy compression

Both jpg files use lossy compression, as they alter the original pixel values. 
The low quality jpeg compresses the file more than the high quality jpeg, 
resulting in smaller file sizes, but also worse alteration of the pixel values. 
The rest of the file formats (.tiff / .png) use no compression, or lossless 
compression - so their pixel values are identical to the original values. 

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

### Handling of large image data

If your images are very large, you may need to use a pyramidal file format that 
is specialised for handling them. Pyramidal file formats store images at 

> multiple resolutions (and usually in small chunks) so that they can be browsed 

Reviewer 2: Dan provided a nice analogy to Google maps that I think is intuitive here for people to understand. 
Are there any handy pictures around that we can use to show/describe this?

acquisition and analysis software.

- During analysis, sometimes you can directly use the format you acquired your 
raw data in. If it's not supported, or you need to save new images of e.g. 
sub-regions of an image, then it's a good idea to switch to one of the formats 
in the table above specialised for analysis (TIFF and OME-TIFF are popular 
choices).

- Finally, for display, you will need to use common file formats that can be 
opened in any imaging software (not just scientific) like png, jpeg or tiff. 
Note that jpeg usually uses lossy compression, so it's only advisable if you 
need very small file sizes (for example, for displaying many images on a 
website).

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: keypoints 

- Image files contain pixel values and metadata.
- Metadata is an important record of how an image was acquired and what it 
represents.
- Napari-aicsimagio allows many more image file formats to be opened in Napari,
along with providing easy browsing of some metadata.
- Pixel size states how large a pixel is in physical units (e.g. micrometre).
- Compression can be lossless or lossy - lossless is best for microscopy images.

> - There are many, many different microscopy file formats. Different formats are 
> best for different uses like acquisition, analysis and display.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- There are many, many different microscopy file formats. Which format would be best depends on different uses like acquisition, analysis and display.
```

we can see information about the `dimension_order`, the size of different 
dimensions (`size_c`, `size_t`, `size_x`, `size_y` and `size_z`), the type and 
bit-depth (`type`) and importantly the pixel size (`physical_size_x`, 
`physical_size_x_unit` etc.). The pixel size is essential for making accurate
quantitative measurements from our images, and will be discussed [in the next 
section of this episode](#pixel-size).

This metadata is a vital record of exactly how the image was acquired and what 
it represents. As we've mentioned in previous episodes - it's important to 
maintain this metadata as a record for the future. It's also essential to allow
us to make quantitative measurements from our images, by understanding factors 
like the pixel size. Converting between file formats can result in loss of 
metadata, so it's always worthwhile keeping a copy of your image safely in its 
original raw file format. You should take extra care to ensure that additional 
processing steps don't overwrite this original image.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

### Exploring metadata in the console

Note that you can also inspect some metadata via the console:

```python

> viewer.layers[0].metadata

Reviewer: The output here is quite hard to read. It's a little off topic but we can make it more readable with 
`import rich;
rich.print(viewer.layers[0].metadata)`
![image](https://github.com/HealthBioscienceIDEAS/microscopy-novice/assets/2535165/e89a12dc-0206-4914-becf-d97e899fbf7c)

Author: I'll add this to the metadata section - thanks!
